1. Define DevOps and explain its importance. Differentiate DevOps from Traditional IT.
Definition of DevOps
DevOps is a set of practices that combines software development (Dev) and IT operations (Ops) to improve collaboration, automation, and efficiency throughout the software delivery lifecycle.
 Its main goal is to enable frequent, reliable, and faster delivery of software by breaking down silos between development and operations teams.
Importance of DevOps
Improves collaboration between development and operations teams


Enables faster and more frequent software releases


Reduces manual errors through automation


Improves system reliability and stability


Supports Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery


Helps organizations respond quickly to changing business needs


Difference between Traditional IT and DevOps
Traditional IT
DevOps
Development and Operations work in silos
Dev and Ops work collaboratively
Manual and slow deployments
Automated and fast deployments
Infrequent releases
Continuous and frequent releases
Reactive issue handling
Proactive monitoring and feedback
Long release cycles
Short and efficient delivery cycles


2. Explain CI/CD with diagram. Differentiate Continuous Delivery and Continuous Deployment.
Continuous Integration (CI)
Continuous Integration is the practice of frequently integrating code changes into a shared repository, followed by automated build and testing.
 It helps detect defects early and ensures code quality.
Continuous Delivery (CD)
Continuous Delivery ensures that the software is always in a deployable state.
 The deployment to production requires manual approval.
CI/CD Pipeline Diagram (Textbook Style)
Code Commit → Build → Test → Package → Deploy → Monitor → Feedback

Difference between Continuous Delivery and Continuous Deployment
Continuous Delivery
Continuous Deployment
Deployment requires manual approval
Deployment is fully automated
Safer for critical systems
Faster release to users
Human decision involved
No human intervention
Suitable for regulated environments
Suitable for rapid delivery systems


3. What is Jenkins? Explain Jenkins Pipeline with example.
Jenkins
Jenkins is an open-source automation server used to implement Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery (CI/CD).
 It automates building, testing, and deploying applications.
Uses of Jenkins
Automates software builds


Executes automated tests


Integrates with Git and Maven


Deploys applications automatically


Supports DevOps pipelines


Jenkins Pipeline
A Jenkins Pipeline is a set of automated steps written as code to define the CI/CD process.
 It is stored in a file called Jenkinsfile.
Sample Jenkins Pipeline (Declarative)
pipeline {
  agent any
  stages {
    stage('Build') {
      steps {
        echo 'Building application'
      }
    }
    stage('Test') {
      steps {
        echo 'Running tests'
      }
    }
  }
}


4. Explain Git and Version Control. Differentiate Git Fetch and Git Pull.
Version Control System
A Version Control System (VCS) is used to track changes in source code, manage collaboration, and maintain history.
Git
Git is a distributed version control system that allows developers to work offline and manage code efficiently.
Uses of Git
Tracks code changes


Supports collaboration


Enables branching and merging


Maintains history and rollback


Difference between Git Fetch and Git Pull
Git Fetch
Git Pull
Downloads changes from remote repository
Downloads and merges changes
Does not modify working directory
Updates working directory
Safer operation
May cause merge conflicts


5. Explain Maven. What is POM? Explain Maven Build Lifecycle.
Maven
Apache Maven is a build automation and project management tool mainly used for Java projects.
Functions of Maven
Manages dependencies


Automates build process


Generates documentation


Executes tests


POM (Project Object Model)
POM is an XML file (pom.xml) that contains:
Project information


Dependencies


Plugins


Build configuration


Maven Build Lifecycle Phases
Validate


Compile


Test


Package


Verify


Install


Deploy



6. Explain Scrum process with diagram.
Scrum
Scrum is an Agile framework used to manage and complete complex software projects using short iterations called sprints.
Scrum Process
Requirements are stored in Product Backlog


Sprint Planning selects items for sprint


Sprint lasts 2–4 weeks


Daily Scrum meetings track progress


Sprint Review and Retrospective improve process


Scrum Process Diagram
Product Backlog → Sprint Planning → Sprint
      ↑                               ↓
      ← Review ← Daily Scrum ← Increment

